# Cross Country can be popular - an attempt at bringing excitement to the world’s most boring sport with World Cross Relay

**by Remington Breeze** 

World Cross Relay (henceforth referred to as WXR) aims to bring the sport of Cross Country running to a larger, global audience and in the process 1) better reward athletes who have dedicated their lives to running, 2) provide better entertainment for fans of running, and 3) offer an alternative pathway for runners who’s options have run out but want to continue to pursue cross country for the joy of running and team involvement. Cross Country is a team sport, something that is not appreciated enough in both Athletics / Track and Field, and in current Cross Country competition formats. Team competition is arguably the most entertaining portion of any sport for both competitors and spectators, and by failing to take advantage of this fact, Cross Country has been relegated to a sport reserved only for amateur student-athletes, small clubs with poor funding, and rare international competition with low viewership. While professional runners do exist, professional Cross Country runners do not, and the world’s best runners are compensated as a B or C league professional athlete would be in the world’s most popular sports. 

Cross Country, and running in general, is not inherently more boring than many sports that boast a much wider viewership. While tastes vary by individual, many sports are not interesting without key elements, and without knowledge of the sport. I draw no satisfaction from watching a baseball game or golf, but I don’t doubt that I would be entertained by either if I learned the intricacies of the games. By the same token, one of my favorite sports is Formula 1, something that most people I know (and most Americans for that matter) have no interest in. By contrast, I have no interest in NASCAR, a sport that has much higher viewership than F1 in the U.S. and is at face value similar to F1; again, this comes down to knowledge of the sport. F1 events are approximately 90 minutes long, much longer than a typical, current-format Cross Country event (10-12km in length or about 30-45 minutes), and (with exceptions) consist of relatively little action. The Tour de France has the world’s highest weekly attendance of any sport, and is an endurance race just as Cross Country is. The difference is prestige, sponsorship, and excitement; all of which can be added to Cross Country with effort. 

Popularity can come from lowering the barrier to entry of being entertained by the sport; everyone can appreciate a good rivalry, and everyone can be loyal to a local team or a team they have an emotional connection to. The most widely entertaining, and thus the most popular, sports share several elements that are missing from current Cross Country competition formats. WXR aims to address these shortcomings.

For a sport to be popular, it needs funding. For a sport to get funding, it needs to be popular. Popularity is difficult to force; however, funding can be brought in from anywhere, so this conundrum can be broken by incentivizing high levels of competition with a large prize pool, which can come from any number of sources. Popularity does not happen overnight, so for WXR to be successful, a slow spread of interest is inevitable. However, funding can happen overnight, which can in turn accelerate the dissemination of interest in the sport. I envision a model where large companies sponsor teams, with the largest sponsors getting partial naming rights to the team itself. Almost every commercialized sport makes use of many sponsors on jerseys, uniforms, and equipment, and WXR will as well. 

As stated above, team competition is makes a sport more enthralling; an extension of this is team loyalty. Location is a quick way to a fan’s heart; if you are from a certain area, you will immediately have a connection to a team that is from the same area. Whether or not you have an interest in the sport itself, if you catch brief coverage of the sport (for example at a restaurant, a friend’s house, etc.), you will find yourself rooting for the team that has the most familiarity. Often this is a location, but it can also be a preferred brand (e.g. rooting for Nike over Adidas). Team identity leads to team loyalty, which leads to superfans and higher viewership. 

Additionally, the current Cross Country competition format involves many more athletes in play at a time than any other popular sport. It is not uncommon for a Cross Country race to have over 200 athletes; most sports have 10-30 athletes competing at a time. This makes it difficult to televise, and difficult for spectators to follow. Cross Country races may also have dozens of teams represented at a time, again making it difficult to follow. By limiting the number of competitors and teams, WXR attempts to address these issues. Lower numbers of athletes competing at any given time also encourages the development of fanbases for individual competitors. 

Another large aspect of any popular sport is strategy. Current Cross Country strategy can typically be summed up in one of a few short phrases: “Give it everything you have”, “Sit and kick”, or “Run as a pack”. None of these offer intrigue or excitement for the audience. Dark horses can come from nowhere and take unexpected victories and podiums, but these events are often buried in large fields of hundreds of athletes, as discussed above. By introducing variable length relay legs, strategy becomes an integral component of competition in WXR. Points awarded for fastest sectors offer another strategic variable that will keep the audience engaged. Time penalties for additional athlete changes and shoe changes accomplish the same. 

The courses themselves of WXR will also offer a source of intrigue for potential viewers. Rather than being flat and unvaried terrain, as are the courses in Athletics competitions and road races, WXR will feature a combination of purpose-built, spectator friendly cross country courses and existing historically significant courses and locations. These courses will have sectors of different types of dirt, road, bark, and track; sectors of pancake flat, extremely hilly and everything in between; and events will be held at a wide spectrum of altitudes. This introduces yet another new strategy consideration, as different shoes will be fitted better to different sectors of the course, as will individual runners. The team will have to consider whether they want the runner who is better at hills to be first leg or last leg; they will need to consider which athletes they want to run in different shoes to gain an advantage in key sectors. The “W” in World Cross Relay is also a key aspect of venue considerations, and can help convert the already international love of running into a truly global dedicated fanbase; novelty is nearly always interesting, and there are few things more novel than exotic locales. The “R” of WXR requires that courses be looped, meaning that live spectators have more viewing opportunities. Current Cross Country spectators often joke that they get more of a workout watching than the athletes do competing, and while this is (usually) an exaggeration, it speaks to the current difficulties of spectating a Cross Country event. 

Telemetry and live updates are also an integral component of any successful sport. For ball sports, the most basic form of live update is incredibly easy to keep track of: the score. For Cross Country, calculating the score is a much more complex affair; even if spectators had a complete list of the current rank of every athlete, it would be impossible for them to calculate the score of even just one team in their heads, purely because of the number of competitors. Many current Cross events incorporate live timing with RFID chips attached to athletes’ shoes, but there are typically only a handful of live update locations and these systems are often inaccurate. With funding, it is a very achievable prospect to have live positions of every athlete on the course; live pace, cadence, and heart rate; and a live video feed from many angles at every moment of the race. Even with these improvements, however, it would still be very difficult to watch and keep track of scores if there were dozens or hundreds of athletes; and practically, it would be nearly impossible to accomplish this level of telemetry with such a large field. This is another reason the field size must be cut down. With only two or three athletes per team running at a time, and only a dozen (give or take) teams, and a new points scoring system, it will be incredibly easy for viewers to keep track of current standings. This is a moot point anyway, as live coverage will keep track of standings automatically. We need only to look at the most popular form of running - Athletics - to see that continuous updates make for better viewing; at any given point a spectator can see exactly how much of the distance a competitor has covered. 400 meter splits are often given by announcers or displayed on screen, and due to the size constraints of a track, there are typically under 30 athletes competing at a time. 

Consistent uniforms and numbers are another aspect of popular sport. While teams often have several different designs of uniform, the amount of different jersey styles may be limited. Additionally, colors and logos are consistent and individual numbers remain the same for an entire season (and usually across several seasons as well). WXR will implement a simple athlete numbering system, similar to that of most other sports; it will also limit the amount of team uniform changes to 3 in a season. Athletes will be allowed to wear individualized shoes and socks as well. 

